ALGORITHMIC &
PORTFOLIO TRADING
Mauricio Labadie, PhD
Algorithmic Quant/Trader
Electronic Broker (Investment Bank)
London, UK
Workshop in Quantitative Finance 2016
Facultad de Ciencias, UNAM
Mexico City, 24 May 2016
1 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Table of Contents
1. Introduction
2. Portfolio algorithm
3. Scheduling algorithms
4. Smart Order Routing
5. Execution algorithms
6. Example
2 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

1. Introduction
3 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Market Order (MOs)
 Instruction to buy (sell) a number of shares at any current price available in
the market
 It ensures complete execution
 But consumes liquidity
 MOs “pay the spread”
 The final execution price could be very different to the current market price
deal-too.com
4 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Limit Orders (LOs)
 Instruction to buy (sell) a number of shares at a specified price or less
(more)
 It includes a limit price e.g. 82 USD
 It provides liquidity to MOs
 LOs “earn/capture the spread”
 But there is a risk of incomplete (or no) execution
santander.com
5 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Limit Order Book (LOB)
 If the limit price does not allow a “cross” then the LO will be added to the
LOB:
 If we buy → bid side of the LOB
 If we sell → ask side of the LOB
 The LOB shows:
 Available prices
 Available volumes at each price
 Number of traders
www.istudiotech.in
6 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

LOB: Sketch
7 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

LOB example: LSE
http://lseg.com
8 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

How trading orders get to brokers
In-house Investment Portfolio Alpha Execution
Research ideas Managers generation Traders
Trading
Orders
External Investment
Research ideas
Broker
Algorithms
Market
9 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

2. Portfolio Algorithm
10 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Portfolio algorithm: paradigm
 “The whole is bigger than the sum of the parts”
 If correlations are zero then it is the same:
 To send one portfolio algorithm, or
 To send N single-name algorithms
 But we know that correlations are not zero:
 Random variables i.i.d. is a dream
 Using correlations to “fine-tune” a portfolio:
 Should be more accurate
 and potentially more profitable
http://www.paginasprodigy.com/ceocmty
11 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Portfolio algorithm: natural hedges
 In a portfolio, the risk on some positions can be offset by the risk on others:
 Long/short portfolios in equities
 Delta neutral portfolios in options
 Arbitrage: Indices and Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs)
 But a portfolio algorithm adds extra complexity:
 Definition of a portfolio metric
 Dynamic control of single-name algorithms
http://thefinanceassociation.com/
12 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Portfolio algorithm: metric
 This is the constraint at the highest level of hierarchy
 Single-name algorithms are subordinated to the metric
 It is a quantifiable metric (i.e. a formula) based on:
 Reward: what is the goal we want to achieve?
 Risk: volatility, liquidity, news, macro events, etc
http://mathoverflow.net/
 The input can be:
 Past market conditions: historical
 Current market conditions: reactive
 Expected market conditions: forecast
 In a nutshell, the portfolio metric “controls the velocities”:
 “All single-name algorithms move together”
13 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Portfolio algorithm: tree
Scheduling 1 SOR 1 Execution 1
Scheduling 2 SOR 2 Execution 2
Portfolio Algo
(N names)
Scheduling 3 SOR 2 Execution 3
Scheduling N SOR N Execution N
14 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Portfolio algorithm: metaphor
 Single name algorithms: the horses
 Portfolio metric: the driver
 Risk management: the archer
Source: Florida Center for Instructional Technology, College of Education, University of South Florida.
15 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

3. Scheduling Algorithms:
when to trade?
16 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Scheduling algorithms: TWAP
Time-Weighted Average Price (TWAP)
 It is the simplest scheduling algorithm
 Distributes the total execution evenly in time
 Example:
 Total number of shares is 85,000
 Trading hours in London are from 08:00 to 16:30
 TWAP schedule:
 10,000 shares every hour
 5,000 shares every 30 minutes
 1,667 shares every 10 minutes
 Etc
17 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Scheduling algorithms: TWAP
18 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Scheduling algorithms: VWAP
Volume-Weighted Average Price (VWAP)
 The “bread and butter” of scheduling algorithms
 It distributes the total execution according to historical volumes
 It requires a (statistical) volume curve:
 Divide the day in buckets e.g. 30 minutes
 For each bucket e.g. from 09:00 to 09:30
 Compute the average (or median) volume traded between 09:00 and
09:30 in the last 20 days
 Normalise the volume curve:
 The sum of all buckets is equal to 1
 Each bucket represents the percentage of daily volume
19 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Scheduling algorithms: VWAP
 Example:
 Execute 85,000 shares
 09:00 to 09:30 is 4.7% of (daily historical) volume
 Number of shares: 85,000 ∗ 0.047 = 3,995
 16:00 to 16:30 is 11.2% of volume
 Number of shares: 85,000 ∗ 0.112 = 9,520
 Compare with TWAP schedule:
 5,000 shares every 30 minutes
 5.9% of volume
20 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Scheduling algorithms: VWAP
21 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

4. Smart Order Routing (SOR):
where to trade?
22 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Market Fragmentation
 Primary exchanges:
 NYSE, NASDAQ, LSE, Euronext, Xetra
 Multilateral Trading Facilities (MTFs):
 Also known as alternative markets:
 Chi X, BATS, Turquoise, Aquis
 Dark pools:
 Block-trading facilities without pre-trade transparency:
 To reduce market impact
 But they have to publish post-trade information
 Internalisers:
 Trade with other desks within the broker/bank
23 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Smart Order Routing (SOR)
 SOR is used to distribute an order into multiple venues:
 Liquidity seeking in a fragmented market
 Why “smart”?
 Optimal allocation based on a dynamic “ranking” of venues
 This ranking reflects:
 Costs e.g. exchange commissions, rebates
 Volumes e.g. current, historical
 Signalling e.g. information leakage
 Indirect costs e.g. spread
 Quality of liquidity e.g. too many HFTs? Too few?
24 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

SOR: Algorithm tree
Primary
SOR
Exchange
Venue Ranking
MTF 1
Dark Pool 1
MTF 2
Dark Pool 2
Internaliser
MTF M
Dark Pool D
25 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

SOR algorithm: metaphor
 Ranking of venues: the head
 Different venues: the hands
“Thousand-hand Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva” dance
Source: http://blogs.wsj.com/photojournal/2009/07/01/pictures-of-the-day-210/.
26 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

5. Execution Algorithms:
how to trade?
27 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Execution with MOs
 Fill and Kill / Immediate or Cancel (IoC)
 Aggressive Limit order i.e. crossing the spread
 Tries to execute in one go all shares
 Non-executed shares are cancelled
 Possible partial execution
 Risk of incomplete execution
 Fill or Kill
 IoC with a 100% completion requirement
 Partial execution is not allowed
 Risk of no execution
28 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Execution with LOs
 Peg
 Dynamically follow the best limit
 Always updates to the best bid/ask
 Always have price priority
 Try to have as much queue priority as possible
 Supported by markets
 Risk of gaming / adverse selection
 “Float Peg”
 Similar to peg order
 But the “pegged price” can be different to best limit
 For example, we buy at (best bid – N) ticks
 Risk of no execution if N is “too large”
29 A lgo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Hybrid algorithms
 Spread Capture
 Tries to get the best price possible for a passive execution
 Limit order algorithms in sequence e.g. Peg
 Optimal placing for earning/capturing the spread:
 “Signals” to determine when and where to post
 Based on probability of execution
 Spread Crossing
 Tries to get the best price possible for an aggressive execution
 Market order algorithms in sequence e.g. FoK
 Optimal timing for jumping/crossing the spread:
 Cost of waiting (queue) vs cost of spread
 Based on probability of execution and “microstructure models”
30 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Hybrid algorithms: metaphor
 Spread Capture: trapper
 Spread Crossing: marksman
www.deviantart.com & commons.wikimedia.org
31 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

6. Example of
Portfolio algorithm
32 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Turnover of portfolio
 Turnover of position from Telecoms to Pharma:
 Sell 100M USD worth of Telecoms
 Buy 100M USD worth of Parma
 Proceedings from the sells will finance the buys
 Scheduling algorithm:
 TWAP
• Market Neutral metric:
• 𝑀𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 𝑡 = 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝐵𝑢𝑦𝑠𝑈𝑠𝑑 𝑡 − 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑈𝑠𝑑(𝑡)
• It “naturally” reduces market risk
• If the market goes up we lose on our buys
• But we win on our sells
33 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Turnover of portfolio
Net USD done
(buys minus sells) Buys are going faster than sells
“Reduce speed” on buys and “increase speed” on sells
+1M USD
𝑁𝑒𝑡𝑈𝑠𝑑(𝑡)
Continue the “speed check”
until complete execution
Time
-1M USD
Sells are going faster than buys
“Reduce speed” on sells and “increase speed” on buys
34 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Portfolio algorithm
 White horse: scheduling algorithm (TWAP tracker)
 Black horse: metric (Market Neutral)
 Driver: cost function (or metric)
 Archer: monitoring of real time market data
Source: Florida Center for Instructional Technology, College of Education, University of South Florida.
35 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

References
 Harris, “Trading and Exchanges”, Oxford University Press, 2003
 Barry Johnson, “Algorithmic Trading & DMA”, 4Myeloma Press, 2010
 Labadie, “Optimal algorithmic trading and market microstructure”. MSc thesis
 Labadie, Lehalle “Optimal starting times, stopping times and risk measures for algorithmic trading”,
Journal of Investment Strategies (Risk) Volume 3, Number 2 (December 2014)
 Cartea, Jaimungal, Penalva, “Algorithmic and High Frequency Trading”, Cambridge University
Press, 2015
LOTR Movie
36 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie

Thank you for your
attention
37 Algo & Portfolio Trading - Mauricio Labadie